  
 RCUK TRAINING GRANT GUIDE
 To be read with
  Conditions of Research 
Council Training Grants
  UK Quality Code for Higher Education (in particular Chapter B11:
 Research Degrees)
  RCUK Statement of Expectations for Doctoral Training
  
 
 This guidance is primarily for use by Research 
Organisations (universities, research 

institutes and other bodies), in receipt of Research Council Training Grants.
  A Training Grant (TG) is a grant paid by a Research Council (RC) to a Research Organisation 
(RO) for the provision of postgraduate study. T
he Research Councils do not fund students 
directly, but fund Research Organisations through Training Grants.
  Research Organisations and supervisors advertise, award and manage RC studentships. 
Therefore, potential and current students should contact the i
nstitution hosting the 
studentship should they have any queries.
  Research Organisations are responsible for checking students™ eligibility and providing 

advice to prospective or existing Research Council students.
  
 
 Abbreviations
 RC Research Council
 RCUK
 Research Councils UK
 RO Research Organisation
 RTSG
 Research Training Support 
Grant TG
 Training Grant
 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
1  Contents
  1. Application 
Procedures
 2. Research Training Remit
 3. Equality And Diversity
 4. Student Complaints/Difficulties
 5. Student eligibility
 6. Student eligibility 
Œ residency
 7. International recruitment to 
RC studentships
 8. Student eligibility 
Œ qualifications/experience
 9. Funding, stipend and fees
 10.
 London and other allowances
 11.
 Research training support grant
 12.
 Disabled students™ allowances
 13.
 Income tax
 14.
 National insurance
 15.
 Post
-award processes
 16.
 Number of students supported and co
-funding
 17.
 Part
-time students
 18.
 Illness
 19.
 Maternity, paternity and adoption leave
 20.
 Ordinary paternity leave and shared parental leave
 21.
 Maternity leav
e 22.
 Adoption leave
 23.
 Suspension of awards (abeyance)
 24.
 Changes of thesis title, research direction, course or programme 
of study
 25.
 Transfers
 26.
 Termination of studentships
 27.
 Annual leave
 28.
 Demonstrating, teaching and oth
er paid work
 29.
 Internships and placements
 30.
 Other training and activities
 31.
 Careers and transferable skills
 training
 32.
 Researcher development statement
 33.
 Use of funds and financial reporting
 34.
 Duration and writing
-up 35.
 Submissions
 36.
 Monitoring and information requirements
 37.
 Joint electronic submissions (je
-s) student details (sd)
 38.
 Submission survey
 39.
 Publication and acknowledgement of support
    Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
2  Application
 procedures
  1. The RCs award studentship funding directly to ROs via a
 TG and not to students. TGs 
are awarded via a number of different approaches.
  2. RCUK has set out Common Terminology for the different approaches to funding 

postgraduate training taken by individual RCs. It provides an overview of the different 

studentship 
schemes. 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/researchcareers/RCUKCommonTerminologyforPos
tgrad 
uateTraining2013.pdf
  
3. More detailed information can be found on individual RCs™ websites:
  AHRC: 
http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/Funding
-Opportunities/Postgraduate
- funding/Pages/Postgraduate%20funding.aspx
  BBSRC: 
http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/funding/studentships/studentships
-index.aspx
  EPSRC: 
http://www.epsrc.ac.uk/skills/students/Pages/studentships.aspx
  
ESRC: 
http://www.esrc.ac.uk/fu
nding
-and
-guidance/postgraduates/index.aspx
  
NERC: 
http://www.nerc.ac.uk/funding/available/postgrad/
  
MRC: 

http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Fundingopportunities/Studentships/index.htm
   
STFC: 
http://www.stfc.ac.uk/565.aspx
  Research training
 remit
  4. The research undertaken by a student as part of an RC studentship must fall within the 
remit of the Council(s) funding that studentship. Each of the RCs fund research training 
within a broad set of subject disciplines and in collaboration with other 
Councils and 

partners.
  
5. Detailed information about the areas of research each Council supports can be found 

on their individual websites. A brief summary of the areas of research each Council 

funds can be found on the RCUK website: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/areas/
  
6. Joint RC funding of multidisciplinary awards is possible on the basis of 50:50 funding 

from two Councils; in that 
case,
 one of the Councils must be designated as the majority 
funder fo
r monitoring and information purposes.
  
 
  Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
3  Equality and
 diversity
    
 
  7. Diversity and equality must
 be promoted in all aspects of the recruitment and career 
management of students.
  
8. ROs should meet the 
RCUK Expectations for Equality and Diversity 
and in part
icular 
ensure that supervisors are trained and supported in this area.
  9. RCs collect and analyse data on the gender, ethnic origin and age of supported 

students to monitor the effectiveness of their policies and initiatives.
  Student
 complaints/difficulties
    
 
 
 
10.
 The RO is responsible for ensuring that students and supervisors are aware of the 

complaints
 procedures and the QAA guidance for students. RCs will not intervene in 
individual cases.
  Student
 eligibility
  
 
 
 
 
 11.
 The RCs are not involved in the recruitment and selection of students for studentships. 
It is the responsibility of the RO to ensure each selected student meets the relevant 

residency, academic, subject and scheme eligibility 
criteria. The RO should not offer a 

studentship to a prospective student unless they are certain that they meet all the 

relevant eligibility criteria. ROs should be able to provide evidence to support this 

decision if required by the awarding RC. Recruitme
nt processes must be fair, open and 
transparent.
  
12.
 There are two types of studentship award (based on meeting residential eligibility 

criteria):
   A full studentship award 
Œ this covers the cost of approved tuition fees and provides 
a stipend.
 RCUK Training Grant Condition 3 paragraphs 15, 16, and 17
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 18 (Page 
29) RCUK Training Grant Condition 3 Paragraphs 10, 11, and 14
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 5 (Page 
12) RCUK Training Grant
 Condition 6 paragraphs 37 to 46
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicators 5 
and 6 
(Pages 12 & 13)
 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
4   A fees
-only st
udentship award 
Œ this excludes funds for a stipend
  Student eligibility 
Œ residency
    
 
13.
 Heads of Department, prospective supervisors and potential students who require 

advice on eligibility should 
contact the RO Registrar's Office (or equivalent) at the RO 

hosting the studentship. Final decisions on eligibility are made by ROs 
- questions 
about eligibility should be addressed to the RO directly.
  
14.
 Useful sources of Information on Student Eligibility 
include: The 
British Council 
and the 
UK Council for International S
tudent Affairs
.  International recruitment to 
RC
 studentships
     
15.
 The RCs have agreed a number of underlying principles in relation to the recruitment 

of non
-UK domiciled candidates to RC funded studentships. 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/skills/frameworks/international
-recruitment
-to-research
-council
- studentships/
  
16.
 There may be RC specific oppo
rtunities arising for those individuals who would not 
normally meet the eligibility requirements for RC funding. ROs in receipt of TGs will 

have been informed of any flexibility and discretion to support international students 

and details can be found on i
ndividual RCs websites.
  
17.
 TG funds cannot be used to cover the difference between home and overseas fee 

rates.
  Student eligibility 
Œ qualifications/experience
  
 
 
 
 18.
 Minimum qualifications and experience to undertake a research degree are detailed in 
the QAA UK Quality for Higher Education.
  
19.
 For some subject areas, there is also an expectation that an individual will have 

undertaken a Masters qualification 
before beginning a doctoral programme. However, 

ROs can use their discretion in deciding whether candidates are suitable for research 

training, making reference to any Council
-specific expectations.
 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraph 5
2 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 4
1 Œ 46 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 6 (Page 
13) Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
5  20.
 Heads of Department, prospective supervisors and potentia
l students who require 
advice on eligibility should contact the RO Registrar's Office (or equivalent). Final 
decisions on eligibility are made by ROs.
  Funding, stipend and
 fees
  
 
 
 21.
 RCs publi
sh their national minimum doctoral stipend and indicative fee level on an 
annual basis. Details can be found on the RCUK website: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/skills/training/
  
22.
 The RO should pay the stipend
 due to students in advance.
  
23.
 Where RCs provide additional funds such as enhanced Research Training Support 
Grants these will be specified in the TG and details are available on individual RCs 
websites.
  London and other
 allowances
  
 
 
 
24.
 ROs are encouraged to use the flexibilities within the TG to support students 
appropriately e.g. to take into account location or discipline. Where London Weighting 
is explicitly included within the TG (AHRC, ESRC, BBSRC, NERC, 
MRC, STFC) it must be 

passed on to the student; students must be studying within the Metropolitan Police 

District or be based at Imperial College, Silwood Park or Brunel for a minimum
 
continuous period of 12 months.
  Research training support
 grant
  
   25.
 The TG includes a Research Training Support Grant (RTSG) component. This is a 
contribution towards costs incurred in training research students e.g. the provision of 

consumables, equipment, travel,
 etc. The RTSG is not intended to relieve an RO of any 
part of its normal expenditure.
  26.
 Additional funding can be drawn from the TG to fund activities to support student 
training such as student attendance at conferences, internships, workshops and short 

course attendance and internships. Support might also be provided for, local, cohort 
specific activities, for example, to develop 
opportunities, which arise from being part 

of a peer group,
 or to raise awareness amongst the cohort of the wider context in 
which their doctoral research sits doctorate was funded. Some RCs may also provide 
RCUK Training Grant Condition 5 paragraphs 32 
- 36 RCUK Training Grant 
Condition 5 paragraph 36
 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 4
7 Œ 53, 36  Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
6  additional funding for activities 
e.g.
 overseas fieldwork; information is available on the 
individual RC websites.
  Disabled students™
 allowances
   
 
 
27.
 RCUK Disabled Students™ Allowances (DSA) are intended to help with additional 

expenditure for the costs of study
-related requirements that may be incurred as a 
result of disability, a mental health pr
oblem or a specific learning difficulty that means 
additional support is needed to undertake a RC funded studentship. The allowances 
can cover the cost of non
-medical personal assistance, items of specialist equipment, 
extra travel costs and general expens
es.
  
28.
 ROs should undertake the assessment of need and provide costs for the student when 

they are required. ROs will be able to claim back eligible costs at the end of the 

academic year by submitting a completed DSA claim form to the RCs by 31st October 
or,
 if the grant is in its final year, including costs in the Final Expenditure Statement.
  29.
 For further information see: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/ResearchCareers/Pages/dsa.aspx
  Income
 tax
  
 
 
 30.
 Payments made as part of a RC studentship are training awards and not regarded as 
income for income tax purposes. The RO should ensure that students are aware that 

earnings received from sources such
 as teaching and demonstrating may be taxable 
and should be aggregated with income from any employment when assessing income 

tax liability in any tax year 
Œ this is particularly relevant for the tax year in which the 
award ends. It is the student™s respons
ibility to ensure they understand their tax 
liabilities throughout their award. The RCs are not able to provide advice on tax, 
national insurance, pensions or on benefits issues.
  National
 insurance
  31.
 No additional payments will be made for students' Nation
al Insurance contributions. 

The RO should ensure that students are aware that they can, if they wish, pay 

contributions as non
-employed persons. They should consult their local office of the 
Department for Work and Pensions about their position to determin
e the impact of 
non
-payment of contributions on any future claims for benefit including the basic State 
Pension. Students may become liable for contributions in connection with any paid 
teaching or demonstrating which they undertake.
  RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 
72 and 
73 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 
75 - 77 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
7  Post
-award
 processes
  32.
 ROs have the authority to make many decisions about post
-award matters without the 
need to have them confirmed or signed
-off by the RCs. Where an RO requires 
additional clarification to make a decision on a post
-award matter, appropriate registry 
or finan
ce office staff should contact the UK SBS directly. The RCs cannot handle 
enquiries from students about post
-award decisions; students should be advised to 
direct all queries to the relevant authority at their RO.
  Number of students supported and
 co
-funding
  
   
 
 33.
 Students can be funded from more than one TG as long as at least 50% of the total 

funding comes 
from the awarding RC. The remaining funding could be drawn from 
other sources, such as departmental funds, other RC TGs or collaborative partners 
outside of academia. The student must not be expected to fund the remainder of the 

studentship costs themselve
s, nor may any individual RC
-funded student be charged 
additional fees above the level paid by the RC.
  34.
 Studentships can be funded 50:50 from two different Research Council TGs in order to 

support an interdisciplinary area.
  35.
 There must be a fair and transp
arent recruitment 
process, which should not, for 
example, favour fees
-only students over those,
 eligible for a full award for financial 
reasons. The RO should advertise the studentship as fully funded regardless of 

whether the full amount is coming from th
e RCs or not. Studentships should not be 

advertised as being part
-funded.
  36.
 The TG funding can be used flexibly. For example, where a fees
-only student is 
supported, unallocated stipend could be used to provide an enhanced stipend to 

another student in an a
rea of recruitment and retention difficulty or could be vired 
into other eligible headings.
  Part
-time
 students
  
 
  37.
 Studentships are available for students who wish to study on a part
-time basis. For 
example,
 those who wish to combine their research training with work or personal 
responsibilities. Students should be made aware that funding for part
-time study is an 
option. ROs and students should be realistic, however, about such arrangements. It is 

expected t
hat the period of study will reflect the percentage of time spent pursuing 
RCUK Training Grant Condition 5
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicators 5 and 6 
(Pages 12
-13) RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraph 
48 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
8  doctoral studies, and a minimum of 50% of full time effort is required (with an 
expected period of study of up to 6 
Œ 8 years). Supervisors will wish to ensure that 
arrangements are
 made to incorporate any new research or research developments 
that are likely to emerge within the extended period of study.
  Illness
   
 
 
38.
 Award payments can continue during absences covered 
by medical certificates for up 
to 13 weeks, within any 12
-month period. RCs do not need to be sent medical 
certificates, but ROs may wish to retain copies for audit purposes. Beyond 13 weeks, 
studentships should be put into abeyance. Medical absences beyon
d the 13 weeks are 

not funded by the RCs.
  39.
 If a studentship is put into abeyance then the RO should ensure that the Je
-S Student 
Details (Je
-S SD) has been updated with the new funding end date and expected 
submission date (based on the period of absence, 
any period of abeyance and, if 

applicable, any subsequent part time study).
  40.
 RCs expect ROs to meet the costs of medical absences from within the cash
-limit of 
their TGs/accounts. If a RO has a very small TG and no expectation of future funding 

from the 
RC, they can request additional funding above the cash
-limit. The ROs will 
need to show that payment for costs resulting from Medical Absences cannot be made 
from the TG and that there is no other contingency funding or TGs to draw on.
  Maternity, paternit
y and adoption
 leave
   
 
 
41.
 RC funded students are entitled to 26 weeks of Maternity Leave on full stipend and a 

further 26 weeks of unpaid maternity leave. Partners are entitled to up to 10 days paid 
Ordinary Paternity Leave on full stipend. Partners may be entitled to up to 50 weeks of 
Shared Parental Leave; this may include paid and unpaid leave, depending on the 

individual circumstances, any paid leave should be at full stipend. There is no qualifyi
ng 
period for maternity, paternity, or shared parental leave.
  42.
 The RCs expect the RO to have policies in place to support students and to advise the 

student of the terms and conditions under which Maternity, Shared Parental or 
Adoption leave and stipend wi
ll be available. 
In addition
, what duration o
f study is 
required on return to study after such leave in order for the student to keep the whole 
value of funding paid during the period of leave. This may be calculated on a sliding 

scale.
  43.
 It is acceptable f
or a student to return to study on a part
-time basis as long as it is at 
RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 5
7, 5
8, 
60 and 6
3 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 
54 - 63 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
9  least 50% FTE.
 44.
 The studentship end dates and expected submission dates should be amended on the 
Je-S SD to reflect periods of Maternity, Shared Parental or Adoption leave or changes 
in study patterns.
  45.
 RCs expect ROs to meet the costs of Maternity, Shared Parental or Adoption Leave 
from within the cash
-limit of their TGs/accounts. If a RO has a very small TG and no 
expectation of future funding from the RC, they can request additional
 funding above 
the cash
-limit. The ROs will need to show that payment for Maternity, Shared Parental 
or Adoption Leave cannot be made from the TG and that there is no other contingency 
funding or TGs to draw on.
  46.
 There is no limit to the number of periods 
of Maternity, Ordinary Paternity, Shared 

Parental or Adoption Leave that can be taken during a studentship.
  Ordinary paternity leave and shared parental
 leave
  
47.
 RC students are entitled to 10 days Ordinary Paternity Leave. A total of 10 days 

Ordinary 
Paternity Leave may be taken at any time during a partner's pregnancy or 
within three months following the birth. No extra funding will be provided to the RO.
  48.
 RC students are entitled to 50 weeks Shared Parental Leave. While recognising that 

students are 
not employees, the Shared Parental Leave should be calculated on the 
same basis as an employee with an employment contract (excluding the qualifying 
period). Further information can be found on the government website: 

https://www.gov.uk/shared
-parental
-leave
-and
-pay
-employer
-guide/overview
  Maternity
 leave
  49.
 If a student becomes pregnant such that the expected date of confine
ment will occur 
during the period of their 
award, the student is entitled to take 26 weeks paid 

Maternity Leave and up to a further 26 weeks of unpaid maternity leave, and to have 
their studentship extended by a commensurate period.
  Adoption
 leave
  50.
 Adoption leave should be granted on the same 
basis as maternity leave (please see 
above).
  Suspension of awards
 (abeyance)
  
     
51.
 RCs expect students to complete their training in a single continuous period and do not 
RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraph 
57 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 13 (Page 
21) Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
10  encourage the suspension of awards (see paragraph 29 for exceptions).
 52.
 Sympathetic consideration should be given to requests for suspensions due to personal 
or family re
asons.
  
53.
 Suspension of an award is limited to a maximum of 12 months unless exceptional 

circumstances prevail.
  
54.
 The studentship end dates and expected submission dates should be amended on the 

Je-S SD to reflect suspension periods with a reason provided. 
The RO must enter the 
details of any approved suspensions in the Je
-S SD within one month of the suspension 
being approved.
  
55.
 If the suspension takes the student beyond the end date of the grant, the RO should 

either add the student on to a later grant cove
ring the remaining period of the 
studentship, or request a no
-cost extension to the grant if no other grant is available.
  Changes of thesis title, research direction, course or programme of
 study
  
 
  56.
 As 
their research plans are developed and refined, a student may need to make some 
modifications to the original programme of research and/or project title. The RO 
should enter changes into Je
-S SD as soon as possible.
  57.
 Major change of topic or direction, sho
uld only be approved in exceptional 
circumstances. ROs must not agree a change to a course or programme of study that 
falls outside the funding RC™s remit.
  Transfers
  
   58.
 Where students transfer from 
one RO to another, the receiving RO will be required to 
accept all the terms and conditions relating to the studentship as it was offered to the 

student, including its start date and duration, registration requirements and 

submission date.
  59.
 If the transfer
ring student is the only student on a particular grant, the entire grant and 
any remaining funds must be transferred to the receiving RO. In this 
situation,
 both 
ROs should submit a grant transfer request through Je
-S to arrange for a transfer of the 
grant
 to the receiving RO.
  Termination of
 studentships
  
 RCUK Training
 Grant Condition 13 paragraph 94
 RCUK Training
 Grant Condition 6 paragraphs 66 and 67
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicators 13 (Page 
21) Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
11  60.
 The RO should ensure that the appropriate termination and grievance procedures have 
been followed, if 
relevant, before terminating a studentship. ROs are expected to take 

reasonable steps to recover monies that have already been paid to students for the 

period following the date of leaving or termination. RCs will not supplement TGs, but 

the remaining TG f
unds could be used to fund/part
-fund another student.
  61.
 Termination details must be submitted via the Je
-S SD.
  62.
 Any PhD student who terminates after the first 12 months of their doctoral studies will 

still be included in the submission data survey.
  Annual
 leave
   
  63.
 Reasonable holidays, a recommended maximum of eight weeks in the year including 
public holidays, should be allowed for by supervisors (pro rata for parts of a year for 

part
-time students). Students 
working in collaboration with non
-academic partners are 
expected to bear in mind their obligations to those partners in planning leave.
  Demonstrating, teaching and other paid
 work
  
     
64.
 Students may undertake teaching or demonstrating work when this is compatible with 

their training and provided their supervisors approve. The total time spent (including 

preparation
 and marking) should not interfere with the progress of the PhD. The 
amount of time is at the RO and supervisor™s discretion but it is recommended that this 
is no more than six hours in any week. It must not be compulsory and must be paid for 
at the RO's u
sual rate and supported by appropriate training. Costs for demonstrating 

or teaching may not be taken from the TG.
  65.
 Students may also undertake a small amount of other paid work, provided the 

supervisor gives consent and it does not delay or interfere with
 the research training.
  Internships and
 placements
  66.
 Students may undertake a work placement or internship where this is either directly 
related to the student™s training, or provides valuable transferable skills and, provided 

this is well justified and 
approved in advance by their supervisor and RO.
  67.
 The placement may be an integral part of the award, in which case a suspension or an 

extension of the student™s funded period is not required. In other cases, there may be 
RCUK
 Training Gra
nt Condition 6
 paragraph
 65 RCUK Training Grant Condition 6 paragraph 
75 QAA UK Quality Code for Hig
her Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 14 (Page 
23) Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
12  a case for the award to be extended
. However if a placement is not directly part of 
their PhD programme (
i.e.
 is undertaken for purely personal reasons) or the student is 
receiving a payment for the placement, then the studentship should be suspended. 

The studentship end dates and expected 
submission dates should be amended on the 

Je-S SD to reflect suspension periods.
  Other training and
 activities
  
68.
 Individual RCs may allow extensions of the student™s funded period for other activities 
e.g.
 for language training.
  69.
 RCs expect ROs to encourage
 doctoral students to collaborate with partner 
organisations in the private, public and civil society sectors, to enhance their research 

training experience; these collaborations do not necessarily require the PhD to be a 

fully collaborative award (
e.g.
 CAS
E). All collaborations should be reported in the SDP.
  Careers and transferable skills
 training
   
 
 
  70.
 The RCs expect that the
 quality of skills provision and the employability of researchers 
are maintained and improved, through ROs acting to:
  Maintain availability of a broad range of career planning, training and development 

opportunities for RC funded researchers
  Fully embed re
searcher development into the normal processes in the research and 
training environment.
  Recover funds to support researcher development from all funders of research and 

research students
  Continue to improve effectiveness and value for money of their 
researcher 
development programmes.
  Researcher development
 statement
      71.
 All research students should receive appropriate training in research
-related and 
personal skills
. The Researcher Development Statement (RDS
) developed by Vitae, 
from the Researcher Development Framework, sets out the knowledge, behaviours 

and attributes of effective and highly skilled researchers appropriate for a wide range 
of careers
. The RDS can be found at: 
http://www.vitae.ac.uk/rds
  RCUK Training Grant Condition 3
 QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 14 (Page 
23) QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education 
Œ Chapter B11: Research Degrees Indicator 14 (Page 
23) Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
13  Use of funds and financial
 reporting
     72.
 The RO can move funds between the different fund headings on the grant except for 

those 
funds, which
 are specific to an individual student 
e.g.
 Disabled Students 
Allowance, or as specified by individual RCs.
  73.
 The RCs expect ROs to use the flexibility of TG 
funding for maximum strategic effect
, 

and
 to think strategically about how best to maximise the impact of the RC™s 
investment in the RO. This might include using the flexibility of part
-funding to 
leverage funding from other sources, or offering enhanced s
tipends to attract the 
strongest candidates in areas of research in which a RO may have been experiencing 

recruitment difficulties.
  Duration and
 writing
-up
  74.
 The expected duration of the PhD project and funding should be agreed with the 

student at the 
outset.
  75.
 The project should be designed and managed to allow for the writing up of the 

research within the scope of the project itself. Some RCs allow a further unfunded 

period of 6 months or 1 year for writing
-up before submission.
  Submissions
  
76.
 BBSRC, NE
RC and STFC expect submission within the funded period. MRC expect 
submission no later than 6 months from funding end date. The AHRC, EPSRC and ESRC 

expect submission within a year of funding end date.
  Monitoring and information
 requirements
  77.
 The RCs receive first
-destination data on the employment of students once they have 
been awarded their degrees from the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) survey 

of Destinations of Leavers from Higher Education (DLHE). The RCs would ask that ROs 

make students aware of the importance of completing the HESA 
questionnaire, which
 they will receive in due course. This information is vital for the RCs to be able to report 

on the impact of their funding.
  Early Submissions
   
 78.
 In some cases, students may submit their thesis prior to the end of their award. Where 
the student continues to undertake work that is directly linked to their thesis, it is 
RCUK Training Grant Conditions 5 paragraph 32, 8, 9, 10, and 11
 RCUK Training Gr
ant Condition
 6 paragraph
 64 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
14  permissible for the award to continue to the end of the quarter i
n which the thesis is 
submitted. For example, a student who submits their thesis on 31 January can retain 
the payment made for the 1 Jan 
Œ 31 March quarter 
but their doctoral award would 
end on 31 March.  
  Joint electronic submissions (je
-s) student detai
ls (sd)
     79.
 All records relating to RC
-funded students should be managed by ROs within the Je
-S SD. ROs must use the Je
-S SD to update information about their students throughout 
the duration of the 
TG. New records must be created within a month of the student 

commencing their study. Amendments to records should be made in accordance with 

RC guidance and within a month of the change being formally agreed by the RO.
  80.
 When creating a new student record,
 the ﬁStudentship Detailsﬂ option should be 
selected from the menu. When updating an existing record, there is the option to use 
ﬁStudentship Detailsﬂ where all details of the record can be amended, or ﬁBatch 
Updateﬂ where multiple records can be amended, 
but where only some parts of the 

record can be altered. We expect ROs to update the Je
-S SD for their students on an 
ongoing basis, e.g. to reflect any change in status or student circumstances, and to 

undertake an annual check by 31 October each year.
  81.
 For any questions relating to Je
-S, ROs should contact the Je
-S Helpdesk on 01793 
867000 or 
JeSHelp@rcuk.ac.uk.
  Submission
 survey
   
  82.
 RCs collect submission
 data from ROs on an annual basis via the Je
-S PhD Submissions 
Survey.
  83.
 If a studentship is terminated before the end of the first year of doctoral funding, for 

whatever reason, the student will be excluded from the submission rate surveys.
  84.
 Students, who 
have been recorded as deceased on the Je
-S SD, are omitted from 
calculations of submission rates.
  Publication and acknowledgement of
 support
     85.
 Further guidance to ensure that funders are acknowledged in a standardised way can 
RCUK Training
 Grant Condition
 13 paragraphs 93 
Œ 100 RCUK Training
 Grant Condition
 13 paragraphs 97 
- 100
 RCUK Training
 Grant Condition
 15 paragraphs 10
4 - 111
 Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
15  be found at: 
http://www.rin.ac.uk/our
-work/res
earch
-funding
-policy
-and
- guidance/acknowledgement
-funders
-journal
-articles
.  86.
 The RCs expect that a full text version of the thes
is should be available no longer than 
12 months following award of the doctorate. Councils recognise that commercial, 
collaborative or publication arrangements may necessitate a slight delay; the delay can 
be at the RO™s discretion but we expect the thesis
 to be deposited as soon as possible. 
The RCs expect the RO to have in place a documented process for determining where 
exceptions can be granted to the requirement for publication within 12 months.
  87.
 When the thesis is lodged, ROs should ensure that the sponsor name and the name of 

the funding Research Council(s) are included in thesis repositories (e.g. AHRC, BBSRC, 

EPSRC, ESRC, MRC, NERC, 
and STFC
).  Revised April 2016
                                                                                                                             
                   
16  