Postgraduate Research Service                                 
 
Page 
1
 
of 
2
 
                     
RDPD4, September 2015
 
 
 
(Updated 
October 2019
)
 
 
 
RESEARCH DEGREES POLICY DOCUMENTS
 
 
Document
 
4 
 
RESEARCH@UEA: A G
uide to Good Practice
 
 
Honesty, openness, accountability and integrity are vital qualities for any academic 
researcher no matter what their discipline or level of experience. UEA needs to 
ensure that all research it supports is carried out in a climate where the highest 
standard
s of personal conduct are encouraged and expected. As a member of a 
research
-
led University you should:
 
 

 
Maintain open and honest professional standards
 

 
Document your results
 

 
Question your findings
 

 
Acknowledge the contribution of others
 

 
Ensure data is 
stored and disposed of responsibly
 

 
Publish your results
 

 
Protect any intellectual assets
 

 
Follow best current professional and ethical practice
 
 
Professional Standards
 
Honesty
 
At the heart of all research is the need for you to be honest in respect of 
your o
wn actions in research and in your responses to the actions of other 
researchers.
 
 
Openness
 
While protecting your own research interests you should be as open as 
possible in discussing your work with other researchers within and outside the 
University and 
with the public.
 
 
Accountability
 
You must ensure that your research is consistent with the terms and 
conditions agreed between the University and the Funder.
 
 
Integrity
 
You must be open and honest about any conflicts of interest, whether real, 
potential or
 
perceived, at the earliest opportunity and at all stages of your research. 
Plagiarism, deception or the fabrication or falsification of results is regarded as a 
serious disciplinary offence.
 
 
Research leadership
 
Academic leadership from the Vice
-
Chancello
r, Pro
-
Vice
-
Chancellors, and the
 
Heads of Schools is important in order to cultivate good research practice.
 
Research 
leaders should create an environment of mutual co
-
operation, in which all members 
of a research team are encouraged to develop their skill
s and in which the open 
exchange of ideas is fostered. Responsibilities in conducting research should be 
clearly allocated and understood. Responsibility for ensuring that new researchers 
understand good research practice lies with all members of the commu
nity, but 
especially with research leaders.
 
Postgraduate Research Service                                 
 
Page 
2
 
of 
2
 
                     
RDPD4, September 2015
 
 
 
(Updated 
October 2019
)
 
 
Training and supervision of researchers
 
Researchers should receive appropriate supervision and should not be put
 
under 
unwarranted pressure to produce results at any cost. Research leaders should 
ensure that all new researchers get appropriate training including supervisory skills 
where appropriate.
 
 
Planning and conducting research
 
Researchers should ensure accurac
y of information when applying for external 
funding. Use of funds should be in accordance with the terms and conditions of any 
grant or contract. Researchers also need to consider the need for ethical approval 
for planned research as outlined in the Univer
sit

 
Research Ethics Policy, 
Principles and Procedures
.
 
An assessment of whether ethical approval is required is 
applicable to 
all 
disciplines.
 
 
Research results
 
Researchers should always be prepared to question the outcome of their research 

 
it is important that research ideas can be challenged and tested once published. 
Throughout their work researchers should keep clear and accurate records of the 
procedures fo
llowed, of the sources of research material where archives, collections 
etc. are researched and of the results obtained, including interim results. Primary 
data which is the basis for publication should be securely stored for an appropriate 
time in a durab
le form. Research should be published when appropriate and 
wherever possible. In order to ensure a high standard of publication, researchers 
should seek an appropriate form of peer review prior to publication.
 
 
Exploitation and protection of intellectual a
ssets
 
The potential to exploit intellectual property should be considered at the application 
and contract stages and certainly before data are submitted for publication or 
presented in any other public forum including the internet.
 
 
Professional, clinical 
and ethical practice
 
The standards of scientific practice set out in guidelines published by scientific 
societies and other relevant professional bodies should be observed by
 
Researchers. Research must only be carried out when all the necessary approvals, 
notifications and licences required by University Committees and legislation, through 
national and local regulatory bodies, are in place.
 
 
 
This document is a summary of 

Guidelines on Good Practice in Research
. 
The full document contains important information and advice for everyone involved in 
research at UEA, at all levels and across all disciplines.
 
