Chapter B11: Research Degrees

A b o u t t h e Q u a l i t y C o d e 
About the Quality Code 
The UK Quality Code for Higher Education (the Quality Code) is the definitive reference point for all UK 
higher education providers.1 It makes clear what higher education providers are required to do, what they 
can expect of each other, and what students and the general public can expect of them. The Quality Code 
covers all four nations of the UK (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales) and all providers of UK 
higher education operating internationally. It protects the interests of all students, regardless of where they 
are studying or whether they are full-time, part-time, undergraduate or postgraduate students. 
The Quality Code has three Parts. Part A: Setting and Maintaining Academic Standards contains three 
Chapters and seven Expectations. Each of the 11 Chapters of Part B: Assuring and Enhancing Academic 
Quality, and Part C: Information about Higher Education Provision contain a single Expectation. An 
Expectation expresses the key principle that the higher education community has identified as essential for 
the assurance of academic standards and quality within the area covered by the respective Chapter or 
Part. Higher education providers reviewed by the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA) 
are required to meet all the Expectations. The manner in which they do so is their own responsibility. 
QAA carries out reviews to check whether higher education providers are meeting the Expectations.2 
The Expectations in Part C and each Chapter of Part B are accompanied by a series of Indicators that 
reflect sound practice, and through which providers can demonstrate they are meeting the relevant 
Expectation. Indicators are not designed to be used as a checklist; they are intended to help providers 
reflect on and develop their regulations, procedures and practices to demonstrate that the Expectations in 
the Quality Code are being met. Each Indicator is supported by an explanatory note that gives more 
information about it, together with examples of how the Indicator may be interpreted in practice. Indicators 
are grouped into clusters under a heading. There are no Indicators in Part A. The explanatory text 
provided directly supports the relevant Expectation. 
Each Part and Chapter has been developed by QAA through an extensive process of consultation with 
higher education providers; their representative bodies; the National Union of Students; professional, 
statutory and regulatory bodies; and other interested parties. 
The UK Quality Code for Higher Education: General Introduction3 should be considered in conjunction with 
this document. It provides a technical introduction for users, including guidance concerning the 
terminology used and a quick-reference glossary. A more detailed glossary is available on QAA‘s website.4 
The Quality Code and legislation 
Higher education providers are responsible for meeting the requirements of legislation and any other 
regulatory requirements placed upon them, for example by funding bodies. The Quality Code does not 
interpret legislation nor does it incorporate statutory or regulatory requirements. Sources of information 
about other requirements and examples of guidance and good practice are signposted within the Part or 
Chapter where appropriate. Higher education providers are responsible for how they use these resources. 
Equality and diversity in the Quality Code 
The Quality Code promotes an inclusive approach by embedding consideration of equality and diversity 
matters throughout. Promoting equality involves treating everyone with equal dignity and worth, 
irrespective of the group or groups to which they belong, while also raising aspirations and supporting 
achievement for people with diverse requirements, entitlements and backgrounds. An inclusive 
environment for learning anticipates the varied requirements of learners, for example, because of a 
declared disability, specific cultural background, location or age, and aims to ensure that all students have 
equal access to educational opportunities. Higher education providers, staff and students all have a role in 
and responsibility for promoting equality. 
Equality of opportunity involves enabling access for people who have differing individual requirements as 
well as eliminating arbitrary and unnecessary barriers to learning. In addition, disabled students and 
non-disabled students are offered learning opportunities that are equally accessible to them, by means of 
1

inclusive design wherever possible and by means of reasonable individual adjustments wherever 
necessary. Offering an equal opportunity to learn is distinguished from every student having an equal 
chance of success, because this is dependent on a range of factors including their motivation and 
engagement in learning. 
All higher education providers have legal obligations which they must meet, for example in relation to 
equality of opportunity and eliminating unlawful discrimination (in the UK particular considerations, such as 
the anticipatory duty to provide reasonable adjustments, apply to disabled students). The Quality Code 
does not seek to duplicate or interpret these requirements. 
2

A b o u t t h i s C h a p t e r 
About this Chapter 
This publication supersedes the Code of Practice for the Assurance of Academic Quality and Standards in 
Higher Education (the Code of Practice), Section 6: Assessment of Students (2006) and the Guidelines on 
the Accreditation of Prior Learning (2004) published by QAA, and forms a Chapter of the Quality Code. 
This Chapter was subject to public consultation between June 2013 and August 2013 and was published 
in October 2013. It became a reference point for the purposes of reviews carried out by QAA from August 
2014. 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
England 
HEFCE guidelines on research degree programmes: 
www.hefce.ac.uk/whatwedo/rsrch/howfundr/researchdegreeprogrammes 
3

I n t r o d u c t i o n : R e s e a r c h d e g r e e s 
Introduction: Research degrees 
The Expectation and Indicators of sound practice in this Chapter represent the broadly shared view of 
those responsible for research degrees about the systems, policies and procedures that are conducive to 
an excellent experience for research students and that support higher education providers in maintaining 
academic standards for research degrees. 
This Chapter of the Quality Code is about doctorates and research master's degrees. It is informed by a 
wider context in which UK research degrees are offered, including an environment of continuous 
improvement and the desire to learn from others' experiences in research education. Below is a summary 
of the context for both doctoral and research master's degrees, including European and international 
reference points, graduate schools and centres for doctoral training, and international study. 
Understanding doctoral degrees 
Doctoral degrees are qualifications rooted in original research: the creation of new knowledge or originality 
in the application of knowledge. The doctorate is therefore unique in the array of qualifications offered by 
higher education providers. Other key reference points for doctoral degrees are the doctoral qualification 
descriptors included in the national higher education qualifications frameworks (for England, Wales and 
Northern Ireland and for Scotland)5 and QAA's Doctoral Degree Characteristics (2011).6 The latter 
identifies significant characteristics relating to the quality and academic standards of research degrees in 
the UK and internationally and includes a summary of the most common UK doctoral awards, including the 
PhD, professional and practice-based doctorates and the PhD by publication. 
Higher doctorates are not included in this Chapter of the Quality Code; they are defined in Doctoral 
Degree Characteristics. 
Understanding research master's degrees 
Research master's degrees and doctorates are closely linked because of the emphasis in both on 
independent research. Students may choose to register for a research master's degree either as a 
stand-alone research qualification or as an entry qualification for a doctorate. A research master's degree 
may also be awarded if a student does not complete a doctorate, for either personal or academic reasons, 
but satisfies the academic requirements for a research master's degree. 
Master's degrees by research may take up to two years' full-time study and are the only form of master's 
included in this Chapter of the Quality Code. Taught master's degrees are included in the other Chapters 
of the Quality Code. Students registered on research master's degrees spend the majority of their 
programme undertaking independent research with supervision and guidance; they may also attend 
structured courses to learn about research methods in the field. Master's Degree Characteristics 
(QAA, 2010)7 summarises the main features of research master's degrees, including a general description 
of the characteristics relevant to research master's degrees. 
For both research master's and doctoral degrees, The Framework for Higher Education Qualifications in 
England, Wales and Northern Ireland (FHEQ) (2008) and The Framework for Qualifications of Higher 
Education Institutions in Scotland (FQHEIS) (2001)8 contain qualification descriptors which set out the 
broad expected outcomes that graduates should be able to demonstrate and the wider abilities that they 
would be expected to have developed. 
Graduate schools and centres for doctoral training 
Within the UK, research students are often part of a cohort; as well as having a subject identity, they may 
belong to a graduate school and/or doctoral training centre. Doctoral training centres and other 
arrangements where higher education providers work together to help to shape the way that many 
doctoral students are trained, for example as part of a cohort, and because a significant proportion are 
based on interdisciplinary research activity. Doctoral training centres seek to ensure a flow of highly 
4

qualified people into research careers. 
Doctoral Degree Characteristics provides more detail about structured research training in both graduate 
schools and centres for doctoral training. 
International study 
In international contexts, research students may be studying on overseas campuses of UK higher 
education providers. This Chapter applies to all research students registered with a UK higher education 
provider, including UK and international students, irrespective of the place of study. Parity of experience 
and outcome is important, including similarly appropriate levels of infrastructure and support at all 
locations. 
Also relevant to the context of UK research degrees are the growing numbers of research students 
registered on transnational, collaborative or joint programmes. Such arrangements enable increased 
opportunities through mobility for early career researchers, both within Europe and more widely. 
Chapter B10: Managing Higher Education with Others9 contains further guidance about delivering learning 
opportunities with others. 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
QAA (2011) Doctoral Degree Characteristics 
www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/Doctoral_Characteristics.pdf 
QAA (2010) Master's Degree Characteristics 
www.qaa.ac.uk/en/AssuringStandardsAndQuality/Documents/Masters-Degree-Characteristics- 
2010.pdf 
Scotland 
QAA (Scotland) International Benchmarking Exercise on the Postgraduate Research Degree 
Student Experience in Scotland: 
www.qaa.ac.uk/about-us/scotland/development-and-enhancement/learning-from-internationalpractice 
European 
A number of non-UK, European reference points are available for research degrees. These include 
the following: 
Framework for Qualifications of the European Higher Education Area (2005): 
www.ehea.info/article-details.aspx?ArticleId=67 
Dublin descriptors (2005) - included as Annex B to the FHEQ. 
www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=2718 
Salzburg Principles, as set out in the European Universities' Association's (EUA) Bologna Seminar 
report (2005): 
www.eua.be/eua/jsp/en/upload/Salzburg_Conclusions.1108990538850.pdf 
Salzburg II Recommendations (this augments the existing Principles): 
www.eua.be/Libraries/Publications_homepage_list/Salzburg_II_Recommendations.sflb.ashx 
The Concordat to support the career development of researchers: 
www.vitae.ac.uk/policy/vitae-concordat-vitae-2011.pdf 
The European Charter for Researchers - The Code of Conduct for the Recruitment of Researchers: 
http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/rights/whatIsAResearcher 
5

Definitions 
Research 
Two general definitions of research have been used to inform the Indicators in this Chapter, especially 
those relating directly to the research environment. They are the Frascati definition of research from the 
relevant Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) manual, and the Research 
Excellence Framework10 definition to which the UK funding councils subscribe. Both are reproduced below. 
These are supplemented by definitions used by higher education subject communities to describe 
excellence in research outputs and outcomes relevant to their academic field. 
Frascati definition of research: 
'3. Research and experimental development (R&D) comprise creative work undertaken on a systematic 
basis in order to increase the stock of knowledge, including knowledge of man, culture and society, and 
the use of this stock of knowledge to devise new applications.' 
'4. R&D is a term covering three activities: basic research, applied research, and experimental 
development. Basic research is experimental or theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire new 
knowledge of the underlying foundation of phenomena and observable facts, without any particular 
application or use in view. Applied research is also original investigation undertaken to acquire new 
knowledge. It is, however, directed primarily towards a specific practical aim or objective. Experimental 
development is systematic work, drawing on existing knowledge gained from research and/or practical 
experience, that is directed to producing new materials, products or devices, to installing new processes, 
systems and services, or to improving substantially those already produced or installed.'11 
Definition of research for the Research Excellence Framework (REF): 
1 'For the purposes of the REF, research is defined as a process of investigation leading to new insights, 
effectively shared.' 
2 'It includes work of direct relevance to the needs of commerce, industry, and to the public and voluntary 
sectors; scholarship12; the invention and generation of ideas, images, performances, artefacts including 
design, where these lead to new or substantially improved insights; and the use of existing knowledge in 
experimental development to produce new or substantially improved materials, devices, products and 
processes, including design and construction. It excludes routine testing and routine analysis of 
materials, components and processes such as for the maintenance of national standards, as distinct from 
the development of new analytical techniques. It also excludes the development of teaching materials 
that do not embody original research.' 
3 'It includes research that is published, disseminated or made publicly available in the form of 
assessable research outputs, and confidential reports (as defined at paragraph 115 in Part 3, Section 2).' 
Research students 
QAA recognises the diverse needs of research students and aims to encourage consistency of provision 
for all students, regardless of background or circumstances. The Expectation and Indicators in this 
Chapter are therefore intended to apply to the many different types of students undertaking UK research 
degrees. These include full and part-time students, UK and international students , students from all 
backgrounds, and those with a range of protected characteristics and prior educational experience. Not all 
Indicators are equally applicable to all students at all times, and wherever possible, the explanatory notes 
recognise this. 
External links 
Higher education providers are responsible for ascertaining which laws and regulations apply to them. 
To meet the Expectation of this Chapter of the Quality Code, higher education providers may wish to 
consider the indicative lists of reference points, guidance and examples of good practice given within the 
Chapter. QAA takes no responsibility for the content of external websites. 
6

Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
The Equality Act 2010 (Specific Duties) Regulations 2011 
www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2011/2260/contents/made 
Equality Challenge Unit (2011) Public Sector Equality Duty: Specific Duties for England 
www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/public-sector-equality-duty-specific-duties-for-england/ 
Equality Challenge Unit (2011) The Public Sector Equality Duty: Specific Duties for Wales 
www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/the-public-sector-equality-duty-specific-duties-for-wales/ 
Equality Challenge Unit (2010) Anti-Discrimination Law in Northern Ireland 
www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/anti-discrimination-law-in-northern-ireland/ 
Equality Act 2010 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents 
Research Excellence Framework: 
www.ref.ac.uk 
7

E x p e c t a t i o n 
Expectation 
This Chapter of the Quality Code sets out the following Expectation about research degrees which higher 
education providers are required to meet: 
Research degrees are awarded in a research environment that provides secure academic 
standards for doing research and learning about research approaches, methods, 
procedures and protocols. This environment offers students quality of opportunities and 
the support they need to achieve successful academic, personal and professional 
outcomes from their research degrees. 
8

I n d i c a t o r s o f s o u n d p r a c t i c e 
Indicators of sound practice 
H i g h e r e d u c a t i o n p r o v i d e r a r r a n g e m e n t s 
Higher education provider arrangements 
Higher education providers offering research degrees safeguard the academic standards of such 
programmes by putting in place arrangements that enable them to be delivered according to national and, 
where relevant, international expectations. Appropriate support and guidance is provided to enable 
research students, supervisors, examiners, and other staff involved in research degrees to fulfil their 
responsibilities and to enable research students to complete their degrees successfully. 
Indicator 1 
Higher education providers that are research degree awarding bodies have regulations 
for research degrees that are clear and readily available to research students and staff, 
including examiners. Where appropriate, regulations are supplemented by similarly 
accessible, subject-specific guidance at the level of the faculty, school, department, 
research centre, or research institute. 
Higher education providers have in place academic frameworks and regulations, policies and guidance 
(the respective status of each of these being defined by the provider) specific to research degrees. 
These are revised and updated regularly, to take account of developments and innovation (see Chapter 
A2: Degree-Awarding Bodies‘ Reference Points for Academic Standards). 
Explicit academic frameworks and regulations, policies and guidance for research degrees may include: 
requirements for recruitment to the programme 
support and guidance that helps students to ensure that, as far as possible, they have chosen a 
programme that is right for them 
procedures for considering claims for the recognition of prior learning 
supervision arrangements 
support structures at different organisational levels, for example department, school, faculty, doctoral 
training centre, graduate school, research centre, or research institute 
academic and procedural requirements for particular postgraduate research qualifications, including the 
requirements for progression, monitoring and review for each qualification and the minimum and 
maximum periods within which the programme may be completed 
assessment methods, requirements and procedures, including the criteria for achieving the qualification 
research integrity and ethics, including avoiding plagiarism, and intellectual property rights and 
responsibilities 
complaints and appeals processes. 
9

Indicator 2 
Higher education providers develop, implement and keep under review codes of practice 
for research degrees, which are widely applicable and help enable the higher education 
provider meet the Expectation of this Chapter. The codes are readily available to all 
students and staff involved in research degrees, and written in clear language 
understood by all users. 
Higher education providers use both external and internal guidance when developing their own codes of 
practice for research degrees. Such codes form an integral part of quality assurance mechanisms and are 
designed to assure the quality and maintain the academic standards of research degrees, bringing 
consistency to research degree provision. They help both prospective and current research students and 
staff to know what their responsibilities are and what they can expect from one another. Guidance at field 
or subject level, for example in handbooks, provides useful additional advice for research students and 
staff and is consistent with academic frameworks and regulations at a wider organisational level. All codes 
and related guidance are written clearly for, and are accessible to, those who need to use them and 
contain sufficient information for all intended users, including any externally located supervisors. 
Higher education providers alert applicants to the relevant codes of practice at an early stage in the 
recruitment process. They also check that new research students are aware of the academic frameworks 
and regulations and other guidance relating to their registration and degree programme. 
Indicator 3 
Higher education providers monitor their research degree provision against internal and 
external indicators and targets that reflect the context in which research degrees are 
being offered. 
Higher education providers define what constitutes success in the broad subject areas in which research 
degrees are undertaken, where appropriate guided by national and international expectations. In setting 
targets and monitoring indicators, higher education providers take into account equality objectives, the 
diverse modes of study and types of their research degrees and, where appropriate, professional 
practitioner and professional, statutory and regulatory body requirements. 
Higher education providers use statistical information interpreted by those with in-depth knowledge of the 
context and environment. Formal opportunities are provided for relevant committees and groups to 
consider statistical and other information relating to research degrees and to act upon it. Higher education 
providers include research students in these processes (See Chapter B5: Student Engagement and 
Chapter B8: Programme Monitoring and Review). 
Factors to be considered when collecting evidence to evaluate the success of research degrees (including 
as part of an annual monitoring process) may include: 
submission and completion times and rates, with account taken of any variations (for example relating to 
individual research students' circumstances, part-time programmes and the requirements of research 
councils, sponsors or other relevant bodies) 
pass, referral and fail rates 
withdrawal rates 
the number of appeals and complaints, the reasons for them, and how many are upheld 
analysis of comments from examiners 
recruitment profiles 
10

feedback from research students (as individuals and collectively), employers , sponsors and other 
external funders 
information on subsequent employment destinations and career paths of research students who have 
achieved the qualification. 
T h e r e s e a r c h e n v i r o m e n t 
The research environment 
In each research environment a range of factors appropriate to the subject, research students and 
research degrees involved can be used to demonstrate its quality. National and international reference 
points provide subject-specific benchmarks appropriate to individual disciplines, which may also be 
influenced by professional requirements . In order to bring about continous enhancement higher 
education providers consider how they develop their research environment. 
Indicator 4 
Higher education providers accept research students only into an environment that 
provides support for doing and learning about research, and where excellent research, 
recognised by the relevant subject community, is occurring. 
The research environment and infrastructure, which may be located in or among more than one higher 
education provider, or across higher education and a work setting (for example in industry), provides a 
suitable context for the conduct of the kind of research in question and is capable of supporting the range 
of research students being recruited. The environment allows for research students' changing needs and 
requirements as the programme develops, including providing an adequate amount of academic and, if 
relevant, work or practice-based supervision of an appropriate quality. The environment is enabling and 
instructional, and is conceived of as a place of learning as well as of research productivity. 
Factors that can be used to indicate excellence in interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary or single-disciplinary 
research may include: 
demonstrable research achievement as recognised either through peer assessment as internationally 
excellent or above; or consistently recognised by the award of grants in open competition with, in both 
cases, outputs such as journal publications, books, and work produced in other media, including 
engineering, performing arts, sculpture, fine art and design, and other professional practice-based and 
clinical contexts 
sufficient numbers of research-active staff, including postdoctoral researchers and research students 
(either located at the provider or included in collaborative or networked arrangements) 
knowledge exchange and impacts (including knowledge transfer partnerships), with an emphasis on the 
practical impact of research outcomes and demonstrable ability to attract external funding. 
An environment suitable for doing and learning about research and for encouraging research 
achievement, whether directly as a provider or through the delivery of learning opportunities with others, 
enables research students to make judgements requiring creativity and critical independent thought while 
accepting that uncertainty is a feature of the conduct of research programmes. Such an environment 
enables students to grapple with challenges that develop intellectual maturity and encourage a high level 
of reflection on the student's own learning about research as well as on research outcomes. Research 
students are encouraged to contribute actively to their research environment, whether in a research team 
where their own research forms part of a larger research programme, or working independently on a 
self-contained project. 
In establishing an environment conducive to research students acquiring the range of research and 
personal skills that are likely to be needed by early career researchers, higher education providers may 
consider the Vitae Researcher Development Statement13 (see Appendix 3), which is endorsed by QAA. 
Higher education providers supply explicit information about the progress research students make with 
their research concerning timely submission and successful completion periods in ways that are clear and 
11

readily accessible to research students and supervisors. This may vary depending on sponsors, where 
relevant, and by the mode of study of the student (for example, full-time or part-time) and according to the 
needs of subjects and individual students. 
An appropriate environment in which to do and learn about research may include: 
exposure to researchers working at the highest level in the student's chosen field and in cognate and 
related disciplines 
opportunities and encouragement to work and exchange ideas with people and organisations using 
research outcomes for their own purposes and with colleagues in the wider research environment 
access to academic and other colleagues able to give advice and support 
adequate learning and research tools including access to IT equipment, library and electronic 
publications 
opportunities for research students to develop peer support networks where issues or problems can be 
discussed informally (this could include access to social space provided for the purpose) 
supervision (see also the section on Supervision, Indicators 9-12) that encourages the development 
and successful pursuit of a programme of research 
guidance on the ethical pursuit of research and the avoidance of research misconduct, including 
plagiarism and breaches of intellectual property rights 
support in developing research-related skills and access to a range of development opportunities that 
contribute to the student's ability to complete the programme successfully (including, where appropriate, 
understanding issues of funding and its commercial exploitation) 
access to and support for a range of development opportunities that contribute to the research 
student's ability to develop personal and, where pertinent, employment -related skills 
availability of relevant advice on career development. 
An environment supportive of research achievement may include: 
a collegial community of academic staff and postgraduates conducting excellent research in cognate 
areas 
supervisors with the necessary skills and knowledge to support research students in working towards 
the successful completion of their research degrees 
access to the facilities and equipment necessary to enable research students, in all modes of study, to 
complete their research degrees successfully 
access to welfare and support facilities that recognise the distinctive nature of research degree study 
the opportunity for research students to raise complaints or appeal 
mechanisms for addressing research students' feedback both as individuals and collectively 
sufficient implementation and monitoring mechanisms to ensure that where a project is undertaken in 
collaboration with another organisation, the standards of both organisations are maintained. 
See Chapter B3: Learning and Teaching; Chapter B4: Enabling Student Development and Achievement 
and Chapter B6: Assessment of Students and the Recognition of Prior Learning. 
Arrangements for research degrees where learning opportunities are delivered with others, including joint, 
dual/double and multiple awards, adhere to the guidance set out in Chapter B10: Managing Higher 
Education with Others.14 Higher education providers put in place clear contractual arrangements between 
the organisations involved and with individual research students where appropriate. The agreements 
reflect the entitlements and responsibilities associated with different forms of arrangement, including: 
determining whether the qualification will be awarded jointly or by multiple research degree-awarding 
bodies and addressing the implications, especially for the research student 
assuring that all parties responsibilities and requirements are specified and met 
ensuring any contracts and agreements for working with others are relevant and fit for purpose 
(depending on whether they relate to individuals or larger groups of research students, and whether 
they involve industrial or commercial bodies or other academic organisations, either in the UK, other 
European countries, or elsewhere internationally). 
12

Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
Vitae Research Development Statement and Research Development Framework: 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
the-vitae-researcher-development-statement 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
about-the-vitae-researcher-development-framework 
England and Wales 
Supplementary notes: Taught and Research Degree Awarding Powers (England and Wales) 
January 2012: 
www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/Supplementary-notes-DAP-12.pdf 
S e l e c t i o n , a d m i s s i o n a n d i n d u c t i o n o f s t u d e n t s 
Selection, admission and induction of students 
The Indicators below, and the accompanying explanatory notes, highlight the importance of clear 
admissions and induction procedures and requirements, and the need for fair and consistently applied 
admissions policies. Material relevant to this section can also be found in Chapter B2: Recruitment, 
Selection and Admission to Higher Education.15 
Indicator 5 
Higher education providers' admissions procedures for research degrees are clear, 
consistently applied and demonstrate equality of opportunity. 
Higher education providers adopt fair procedures and make available accurate information on admissions 
processes for research degrees to applicants and staff involved in a widely accessible format (see Part C: 
Information about Higher Education Provision16 of the Quality Code). 
Higher education providers ensure that students have the information to make sure they are on a 
programme that is right for them. 
Through the use of timely and comprehensive development opportunities, higher education providers also 
ensure that staff responsible for admissions are aware of, and understand, legal requirements relating to 
the processes and the need to conform to such legislation. 
As part of the admissions processes for research degrees, higher education providers put in place 
monitoring arrangements for equal opportunities requirements to satisfy themselves that: 
the programmes comply with with internal and external guidance 
an effective support infrastructure is in place for all research students, taking account of mode of study, 
subject needs and individual circumstances 
applicants are made aware of opportunities to apply for additional or special funding and how to apply 
for such funds. 
13

Indicator 6 
Only appropriately qualified and prepared applicants are admitted to research degree 
programmes. Admissions decisions involve at least two members of the higher education 
provider's staff who have received training and guidance for the selection and admission 
of research degree students. The decision-making process enables the higher education 
provider to assure itself that balanced and independent admissions decisions have been 
made in accordance with its admissions policy. 
For doctoral research, applicants are expected to have at least one of the following: 
an undergraduate degree, usually with class 2:1 or equivalent in a relevant subject 
a relevant master's qualification or equivalent evidence of prior professional practice or learning that 
meets the higher education provider's criteria and guidelines for the recognition of prior learning for the 
purpose of meeting entry requirements for a programme (including, for example, the required amount of 
prior publications or other output specified for applicants for the award of PhD by published work). 
Higher education providers ensure guidance about admissions is accessible to both recruiters and 
prospective students and provides training to enable those involved in admissions decision making to fulfil 
their role effectively and efficiently. 
Admissions staff consider, if relevant, how interviews with applicants might be used as part of the 
admissions process (including arrangements for assessing the suitability of those based overseas and 
working at a distance). 
In addition to familiarising applicants and selectors with the provider's admissions policies, guidance 
covers the use of references and other information used to assess the suitability of an applicant to 
undertake postgraduate research. 
Higher education providers put in place suitable criteria for assessing the applicant‘s qualifications and 
preparedness, including considering evidence submitted in support of any requests made for the 
recognition of prior learning gained through professional practice or other appropriate work experience or 
study. 
Higher education providers take account of the applicant's motivation and potential to complete the 
programme. The latter may be affected by his or her financial circumstances, and for this reason higher 
education providers give clear guidance to applicants at the earliest opportunity about their financial 
responsibilities and the consequences of being unable to meet their commitments. 
Higher education providers specify the level of English language competence appropriate for entry to the 
degree. A process is consistently applied to determine whether or not applicants meet this level of 
competence. Higher education providers provide support for applicants that have demonstrated their 
academic abilities but are admitted to research degrees on the condition that their English must be 
improved. Applicants may expect support in the form of timely opportunities to improve their language skills 
to a level consistent with producing a thesis (or equivalent) that meets the requirements of the higher 
education provider in both grammar and style, and that enables them to defend their thesis sufficiently well 
during the oral examination. 
For quality assurance purposes and to help selectors, higher education providers supply clear guidance 
about the balance of responsibilities between staff in local units and those working in central postgraduate 
administration. 
14

Indicator 7 
Higher education providers define and communicate clearly the responsibilities and 
entitlements of students undertaking research degree programmes. 
Higher education providers' offers to successful applicants for research degrees are communicated 
formally, for example in a letter (hard copy or electronic) that is specific to the individual applicant. 
This constitutes a contract between the applicant and the provider. The terms of the letter are binding on 
the higher education provider and, upon acceptance, on the applicant. Where responsibilities for induction 
and related matters are shared, for example between more than one department, school, faculty, research 
centre/institute, or between a graduate school, doctoral training centre and/or any of the above 
organisational units, the role of each is articulated clearly at the earliest opportunity. 
The offer letter and enclosures may refer to: 
the expected total fees, including extra charges (such as 'bench' fees) which will be levied, and any 
other expenditure on practical items relevant to the individual applicant 
the expected period of study for which the applicant will be enrolled 
the requirements placed by the higher education provider on the applicant (for example, engaging in 
training on research methods and other relevant topics, progress reports, contact with supervisors) 
arrangements for enrolment/registration 
how to find the relevant academic framework and regulations, student handbook, sources of funding 
(including additional and special funding, eligibility and how to apply for such funds), and other relevant 
information for a research degree 
the responsibilities of the applicant for his or her academic studies and candidacy for a research degree 
the requirements and conditions of any sponsor (if known) 
opportunities to undertake teaching or other duties and any conditions associated with these, including 
training requirements of the higher education provider (to be confirmed at the beginning of the 
programme unless already part of the funding arrangements) 
practical information, for example concerning accommodation, finances or travel. 
Higher education providers' policies, practices and requirements with respect to intellectual property rights 
(including arrangements, where relevant, with external commercial or industrial organisations with their 
own intellectual property rights arrangements ) are made clear to applicants and to any relevant third party 
(see Part C: Information about Higher Education Provision).17 
Other information is provided when an applicant has accepted an offer, for example as part of the 
induction process, and may include handbooks, details of health and safety procedures, regulations 
concerning plagiarism and good practice in research, guidance on research ethics, and how a higher 
education provider views personal conduct and academic performance (see Chapter B4: Enabling Student 
Development and Achievement). 
Higher education providers inform research students of their responsibilities at the beginning of their 
programme. 
Research students' responsibilities may include: 
their own personal and professional development, including, where possible, recognising when they 
need help and seeking it in a timely manner 
maintaining regular contact with supervisors (joint responsibility with supervisors) 
preparing adequately for meetings with supervisors 
setting and keeping to timetables and deadlines, including planning and submitting work as and when 
required and generally maintaining satisfactory progress with the programme of research 
15

maintaining research records in such a way that they can be accessed and understood by anyone with 
a legitimate need to see them 
raising awareness of any specific needs or circumstances likely to affect their work 
attending any development opportunities (research-related or other) that have been identified when 
agreeing their development needs with their supervisors (see explanation with Indicator 9 below) 
being familiar with the regulations and policies that affect them, including those relating to their 
qualification, health and safety, intellectual property, electronic repositories, and ethical research (see 
also Indicator 4 and Indicator 8). 
Indicator 8 
Research students are provided with sufficient information to enable them to begin their 
studies with an understanding of the environment in which they will be working. 
Higher education providers ensure that the timing and content of induction programmes is appropriate and 
relevant to the diverse needs of specific groups of research students (including part-time and newly 
arriving international students , and those with professional commitments). Induction is delivered at the 
most suitable organisational level (provider/faculty/school/department/research centre/research institute, 
or a combination). 
New research students are provided with details about where they can find essential information. Higher 
education providers put in place arrangements for ongoing support for research students (see Chapter 
B4: Enabling Student Development and Achievement). 
Information produced for incoming research students includes details about supervision arrangements, 
and evaluation, monitoring and review procedures. During the induction process, research students are 
provided with details of opportunities that exist for meeting other research students and staff, and for 
developing scholarly competence and independent thought. 
Each student is provided with an early opportunity to meet his/her supervisor to agree on plans for the 
programme. 
The plans that the research student and supervisor agree for the programme include the following: 
the initial objectives of the research, taking account of the sponsor's requirements where appropriate 
the development and general educational needs of the research student 
the means by which the research student and supervisor (or supervisors - see Indicator 10) will 
communicate and how they will arrange regular meetings 
the means of monitoring progress in the research and training aspects of the programme. 
16

Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
Equality Act 2010 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents 
QAA (2012) International Students Studying in the UK - Guidance for UK Higher Education 
Providers 
www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/International-students-studying-in-the-UK.pdf 
Vitae Research Development Statement and Research Development Framework: 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
the-vitae-researcher-development-statement 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework 
S u p e r v i s i o n 
Supervision 
The research student-supervisor relationship is of paramount importance in all research degrees. 
Higher education providers therefore establish systematic and clear supervision arrangements. These 
include providing research students with: 
opportunities for access to regular and appropriate supervisory support 
encouragement to interact with other researchers 
advice from one or more independent sources, internal or external 
arrangements that protect the research student in the event of the loss of a supervisor. 
These points are covered in more detail by the following Indicators. They provide a framework for the 
minimum requirement for research student supervision. 
Indicator 9 
Higher education providers appoint supervisors with the appropriate skills and subject 
knowledge to support and encourage research students, and to monitor their progress 
effectively. 
To ensure that all supervisors possess the expertise required for their role, higher education providers 
use criteria for eligibility in appointing supervisors, whose performance in the role is kept under review. 
Supervisors are expected to engage in development opportunities, to equip them to supervise research 
students, and to meet requirements for continuing professional development. Supervisor training and 
development opportunities are relevant to research education, providing advice on how to supervise 
research students effectively in different circumstances, and are given similar status to programmes on 
teaching and learning in higher education for new academic staff. In supporting supervisors to enhance 
their knowledge and skills, higher education providers define and enable sharing of good practice and 
encourage strategies such as mentoring relationships, for example for new supervisors. 
To ensure consistency of supervision, supervisors working in industry or professional practice are made 
aware of and enabled to fulfil the higher education provider's expectations of the supervisor role and are 
offered opportunities to engage in developmental activities. 
17

Indicator 10 
Each research student has a supervisory team containing a main supervisor who is the 
clearly identified point of contact. 
Supervision arrangements vary depending on the structure for research student support that the higher 
education provider adopts, and on any guidance provided by the funding body where relevant. 
New research students are made aware when they can expect their supervisors to be appointed. 
Involvement with a supervisory team provides valuable development opportunities for staff, giving them a 
grounding in the skills required to become an effective research supervisor. In addition to the main 
supervisor, the supervisory team may include: 
other supervisors and research staff in the subject 
a departmental adviser to postgraduate students 
a faculty postgraduate tutor 
other individuals in similar roles. 
Breadth of experience and knowledge across the supervisory team ensures that the student always has 
access to someone with experience of supporting research students through to successful completion of 
their programme. 
In all cases, each research student has an identified single point of contact who is the main supervisor. It is 
made clear to the research student who the alternative contact is if the main supervisor is not available. 
This may either be the second supervisor or an additional designated member of academic staff able to 
provide advice and support. To avoid misunderstandings, the names, contact details and responsibilities 
of the main and other supervisors are provided to research students at registration and readily available 
throughout their programme. 
Higher education providers ensure that students are easily able to contact their supervisors for advice and 
guidance throughout their programme, irrespective of their geographical location. Reasonable accessibility 
of supervisors is given priority and providers assure themselves that research students and supervisors 
are aware of the importance of this, and have a shared understanding of what is reasonable. 
Between them, the supervisors and, where relevant, other members of the supervisory team, ensure that 
research students receive sufficient support and guidance to facilitate their success. 
At least one member of a student's supervisory team is currently engaged in excellent research in the 
relevant discipline(s), ensuring that the direction and monitoring of the student's progress is informed by 
up to date subject knowledge and research developments. 
If and when a main supervisor is not able to continue supervising the research student, another 
appropriate supervisor is appointed to assume the role. 
Higher education providers take a view on how long a main supervisor may be absent before a permanent 
replacement is appointed, bearing in mind the importance of providing breadth and continuity of 
supervision for the research student in determining this period. In some circumstances, another supervisor 
is asked to assume the role of main supervisor while a replacement main supervisor is found. 
If a research student-supervisor relationship is not working well, alternative independent sources of advice 
are made available to the research student. By mutual agreement between the research student and the 
higher education provider, and where permitted by the terms of any sponsorship agreement, supervisory 
responsibilities can be changed, at the request of either the research student or a supervisor. 
18

Indicator 11 
Higher education providers ensure that the responsibilities of research student 
supervisors are readily available and clearly communicated to supervisors and students. 
Supervisors and research students are made fully aware of the extent of one another's responsibilities, to 
enable both to understand the supervisors' contribution to supporting the research student and where the 
supervisors' responsibilities end. 
Supervisors are sensitive to the diverse needs of individual research students and the associated support 
that may be required in different circumstances. Higher education providers ensure that supervisors are 
aware of the range of support available, and communicate to their research students how they can access 
it. Higher education providers ensure that relevant documents concerning these responsibilities are readily 
available to research students and supervisors in a format that is easily accessible to the research 
student. 
Higher education providers develop their own staff guidance on the minimum frequency of contact 
advisable between research students and supervisors, as well as details of procedures for dealing with 
extensions and suspensions of study. Including this information in the academic framework and regulations 
and guidance (see Indicator 2) may be helpful to research students and supervisors. 
Arrangements between the research student and supervisor may be kept flexible, as long as both are 
satisfied that adequate support is being provided for the research student and that there are sufficient 
opportunities for formally monitoring progress. As well as providing opportunities for formal interaction, 
higher education providers expect research students and supervisors to meet informally, and frequently 
enough to address the research student's need for general guidance. 
Research students and supervisors are jointly responsible for ensuring that regular and frequent contact 
is maintained. Provision is made for the research student, as well as the supervisor, to take the initiative 
when necessary. The nature and frequency of contact between research student and supervisor varies 
depending on the duration of the programme, the way the research is being conducted, and the amount of 
support needed by the research student. 
Taking account of these considerations, the following are agreed by and clear to both research student 
and supervisor from the start of the programme: 
the minimum frequency of scheduled meetings between research student and supervisor, or 
supervisory team, and the purpose of such meetings 
guidance on the nature and style of the research student-supervisor interaction, including discussions 
about academic and personal progress. 
The responsibilities of supervisors may be set out in guidance issued by the higher education provider or 
by any sponsor(s). They may include: 
introducing the research student to the department (or equivalent), its facilities and procedures, and to 
other research students and relevant staff 
providing satisfactory and accurate guidance and advice 
monitoring the progress of the research student's research programme 
establishing and maintaining regular contact with the research student (guided by the higher education 
provider's stated academic framework and regulations and guidance) 
being accessible to the research student to give advice (by whatever means is most suitable, given the 
research student's location and mode of study) 
contributing to the assessment of the research student's development needs 
providing timely, constructive and effective feedback on the research student's work and overall 
progress within the programme 
19

ensuring that the research student is aware of the need to exercise probity and conduct his or her 
research according to ethical principles, including intellectual property rights, and of the implications of 
research misconduct 
ensuring that the research student is aware of sources of advice, including careers guidance 
helping research students understand health and safety responsibilities 
providing effective pastoral support and/or referring the research student to other sources of such 
support, including student advisers, graduate school staff and others within the research student's 
academic community 
helping the research student to interact with others working in the field of research, for example 
encouraging the research student to attend relevant conferences and supporting him/her in seeking 
funding for such events 
where appropriate, giving encouragement and guidance to the research student on the submission of 
conference papers and articles to refereed journals 
maintaining the necessary supervisory expertise, including the appropriate skills, to perform all of the 
role satisfactorily, supported by relevant continuing professional development opportunities. 
Indicator 12 
Higher education providers ensure that individual supervisors have sufficient time to 
carry out their responsibilities effectively. 
In appointing supervisors, managers need to be aware of and guided by the overall workload of the 
individual, including teaching, research, administration and other responsibilities; for example, external 
examining duties and other professional commitments, such as consultancy or clinical responsibilities. 
The role of supervisors is critical in maintaining quality and academic standards when supporting research 
students' research, and higher education providers therefore find ways of showing their support for and 
rewarding this valuable contribution to the research environment. 
Higher education providers ensure that supervisors have sufficient time for adequate contact with each 
research student to fulfil the responsibilities listed under Indicator 11. Supervisors and research students 
agree between themselves the level of interaction required and what constitutes sufficient contact (which 
may vary year by year to reflect the research student's changing needs), in terms of both the quality and 
the quantity of the time allocated. When a research student needs advice or guidance, supervisors 
respond within a reasonable timescale. 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
Vitae Research Development Statement and Research Development Framework: 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
the-vitae-researcher-development-statement 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework 
20

P r o g r e s s a n d r e v i e w a r r a n g e m e n t s 
Progress and review arrangements 
Regular and structured interaction is necessary between research students and supervisors to enable 
research students to progress satisfactorily. Higher education providers alert research students and 
supervisors to the requirements of the progress and review process, including knowledge of their 
respective responsibilities. 
Indicator 13 covers all types of review of research student progress, including meetings between the 
research student and the supervisors, and meetings of other individuals, such as members of an annual 
review panel. There are two distinct types of review: meetings that deal with formal review of the research 
student's progress and forward planning, and informal meetings where the research student and members 
of the supervisory team meet to discuss general matters relating to the student's research. 
Indicator 13 
Higher education providers put in place clearly defined mechanisms for monitoring and 
supporting research student progress, including formal and explicit reviews of progress 
at different stages. Research students, supervisors and other relevant staff are made 
aware of progress monitoring mechanisms, including the importance of keeping 
appropriate records of the outcomes of meetings and related activities. 
The main purpose of the monitoring process is to provide overall support for the research student to 
maximise his or her likelihood of completing the research programme successfully within an appropriate 
timescale. The purpose and frequency of monitoring arrangements are made clear from the outset, so that 
both the research student and the supervisor can plan adequately for them, prepare relevant documents, 
and consult other individuals as appropriate. 
The monitoring process also enables staff to ascertain when a research student's progress is not 
satisfactory. Support is given to help the research student make improvements. 
Higher education providers put in place processes for reviewing research students' progress, involving 
individuals independent of the supervisors and the research student. Such processes operate less 
regularly than meetings between research student and supervisor and may involve, for example, an 
annual review by a panel or other specified body such as a research degrees committee. A significant 
progress review is undertaken at specific points in a research student's programme, for example when 
completing probationary periods of training or transferring from a research master's to a doctoral degree. 
The student is present at this review. In professional or practice-based doctorates, there may be a 
requirement for research students to pass structured elements of a programme before progressing. 
Formal evaluation of progress in these circumstances may involve summative assessment. 
The target dates of expected review stages throughout the programme, such as those referred to above, 
are agreed by and clear to both research student and supervisors. 
Higher education providers make clear to research students and supervisors from the beginning of the 
programme: 
the implications of the possible outcomes of formal review meetings or assessments 
the criteria to be used for making decisions about the extension, suspension or termination of a 
research student's registration 
the circumstances in which research student appeal mechanisms may be used and how to use them. 
Regulations specify the minimum and maximum periods within which the research student can complete 
the research programme. Bearing these in mind, decisions about transferring a student's registration to a 
doctoral qualification, or confirming such a registration, take place when there is sufficient evidence to 
assess the student's performance. The research student usually provides, as a minimum, a written 
21

submission which is considered by a panel independent of the research student and the supervisory team 
and which includes the research student's main supervisor (as an observer). Research students can 
request the opportunity to meet a review panel without the supervisors being present. 
Guidance in this area is made easily accessible to all concerned. It may take the form of advice about the 
operation of the panel and the kind of records that need to be kept in relation to different types of meeting 
and review. For example, the information that is recorded after an informal meeting that takes place 
regularly between the research student and his or her supervisor is likely to be different from and less 
detailed than the formal record of a meeting to consider an application to transfer to a doctoral degree or 
a meeting of an annual review panel. It may be considered important for research students to keep the 
record of regular 'routine' meetings with supervisors, who also keep copies of records of supervisory 
meetings. 
D e v e l o p m e n t o f r e s e a r c h a n d o t h e r s k i l l s 
Development of research and other skills 
The importance of acquiring research and other skills during research degree programmes is recognised 
by research students, academic staff, sponsoring organisations, employers, and doctoral graduates. 
These skills improve the research student's ability to complete the research degree successfully. 
The development and application of such skills is a significant element in the research graduate's 
capability for sustaining learning throughout his or her career, whether in an academic role or in other 
employment. Research students are encouraged to take ownership and responsibility for their own 
learning, during and after their programme of study, and to recognise the value of developing transferable 
skills. Material relevant to this section will also be found in Chapter B4: Enabling Student Development 
and Achievement.18 
Indicator 14 
Research students have appropriate opportunities for developing research, personal 
and professional skills. Each research student's development needs are identified and 
agreed jointly by the student and appropriate staff at the start of the degree; these are 
regularly reviewed and updated as appropriate. 
Research students may need support to develop their subject-specific, research, communication and 
other skills they require to become effective researchers, to enhance their employability and assist their 
career progress after completion of their degree. These skills may to varying extents be present on 
commencement and require further development; to be explicitly taught; or to be developed during the 
research programme. 
Opportunities for developing personal and professional skills take account of the differing needs of 
individual research students arising from the diversity both of their prior experience and of the 
environments in which they may later draw upon these skills. A range of mechanisms are used to support 
learning, and they are sufficiently flexible to address those individual needs. The emphasis in formal 
training is on quality, relevance and timeliness. 
Opportunities for skills development are integrated in research degrees. Depending on the nature of the 
subject and the needs of the research student, personal and professional development opportunities for 
research students are provided with the aim being to maximise the effectiveness of training in developing 
skills, both research and generic. 
In deciding which elements of research and skills development to make mandatory, higher education 
providers take into account advice from research councils and other sources. To ensure research 
students' needs are being met, providers regularly review the training in research and generic skills 
provided for their research students. 
Opportunities for skills development are made available either by the higher education provider offering 
22

the research student's research programme, or by other providers; for example through regional or other 
collaboration. 
Higher education providers draw on their experience of structured training and education to establish 
personal and professional development opportunities for the benefit of research students. The extent to 
which research students are required to take advantage of these opportunities is often negotiated through 
the supervision process, taking account of subject and individual needs. 
Supporting the learning and teaching of others, and if appropriate assessing student work, provides 
research students with an opportunity to develop a range of personal skills. It can also reinforce research 
students' own knowledge of their subject. Higher education providers may offer research students 
non-compulsory teaching opportunities; in some circumstances and subjects: these may be limited and not 
necessarily available to all research students. Where research students have teaching roles, they receive 
appropriate training, support and mentoring; for their own benefit and to safeguard the experience of the 
students they are teaching . Where possible higher education providers enable research students to be 
part of a larger teaching team so that they can benefit from the support and mentoring provided by 
experienced teachers. They ensure that teaching duties are not so intensive or time-consuming as to 
affect the research student's ability to complete (see Chapter B3: Learning and Teaching and Chapter B6: 
Assessment of Students and the Recognition of Prior Learning). 
Students are encouraged to reflect on their learning, supported by frameworks developed by providers for 
recording personal development. 
Higher education providers ensure that research students who may be unfamiliar with keeping records of 
their progress and development receive additional guidance and support. Higher education providers may 
develop ways of formally recognising the acquisition of transferable skills in parallel with, or as part of, the 
academic assessment of the research student's progress. 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
Vitae Research Development Statement and Research Development Framework: 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
the-vitae-researcher-development-statement 
www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework 
E v a l u a t i o n m e c h a n i s m s 
23

Evaluation mechanisms 
Collecting and acting upon evaluation from research students, staff, examiners, and others involved in 
research programmes is an important part of the quality assurance process at all levels (higher education 
provider/faculty/school/department/research centre/research institute). Wherever possible and relevant, 
providers integrate the results of external surveys with internal evaluation mechanisms. 
Indicator 15 
Higher education providers put in place mechanisms to collect, review and respond as 
appropriate to evaluations from those concerned with research degrees, including 
individual research students and groups of research students or their representatives. 
Evaluations are considered openly and constructively and the results are communicated 
appropriately. 
Higher education providers establish and operate constructive evaluation procedures that are as 
representative as possible of the views of all those involved. These include mechanisms for seeking, 
analysing and acting upon feedback from the following groups: 
current research students and recent research degree graduates 
supervisors, review panels and internal examiners 
research administrators 
external parties, including external examiners, sponsors, other organisations with whom the higher 
education provider works, employers and, where possible, alumni. 
(See also list of suggested evaluation factors under Indicator 3). 
Individual evaluation mechanisms enable students, if they wish, to provide confidential views that are not 
made known to their supervisors unless the research student's permission is given. 
Higher education providers use the evaluations in an appropriate format in their quality assurance 
processes, as part of the regular review of academic standards and quality. The feedback and review 
cycle occurs at least annually. Information about action taken in response to evaluations is clear and made 
easily and promptly available to those involved (see also Chapter B5: Student Engagement).19 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
UK-wide 
Higher Education Academy Postgraduate Research Experience Survey (PRES): 
www.heacademy.ac.uk/PRES 
A s s e s s m e n t 
Assessment 
Assessment processes for research qualifications reflect the distinctive nature of research degrees and 
include an oral examination. The following three Indicators and explanations address the most important 
elements of assessment for research students and qualifications. 
Material relevant to this section may also be found in Part A: Setting and Maintaining Academic Standards 
and Chapter B6: Assessment of Students and the Recognition of Prior Learning.20 
24

Indicator 16 
Higher education providers that are research degree awarding bodies use criteria for 
assessing research degrees that enable them to define their academic standards and the 
achievements of their graduates. The criteria used to assess research degrees are clear 
and readily available to research students, staff and examiners. 
In setting criteria for assessing different types of research degrees, research degree-awarding bodies 
refer to the qualification descriptors for doctoral and research master's degrees in the national higher 
education qualifications frameworks (or their equivalent). Research degree-awarding bodies use the 
qualification nomenclature in these documents, including the guidance on the use of titles for research 
degrees of different kinds. Assessment criteria may be modified to reflect differences in subjects such as 
the performing or visual arts and those of professional and practice-based doctorates and doctorates by 
published work. 
Research degree-awarding bodies safeguard the academic integrity and consistency of such programmes 
and qualifications internally and externally, by applying assessment criteria for research degrees, taking 
account of the academic standards summarised in the UK qualification descriptors for doctoral degrees 
and research master's degrees. They make assessment criteria available to research students to give 
them the insight they need into what is expected of them. Criteria enable research students to show the full 
extent of their abilities and achievements at the level of the qualification for which they are aiming. 
They also offer practical advice for research students, for example on the required presentation of work, 
what is meant by originality, and about best academic practice. 
When making an award at a different level from the qualification for which the student has initially been 
assessed (for example giving a master's award to a PhD candidate), research degree-awarding bodies 
use assessment criteria that enable examiners to recognise the research student's positive achievement 
(see Chapter A3: Securing Academic Standards and an Outcomes-Based Approach to Academic Awards). 
Indicator 17 
Research degree final assessment procedures are clear and are operated rigorously, 
fairly, and consistently. They include input from an external examiner and are carried out 
to a reasonable timescale. Assessment procedures are communicated clearly to research 
students, supervisors and examiners. 
Although there is some variation between higher education providers and between different types of 
research degree, common features of research degree assessment procedures in the UK system are as 
follows. 
The candidate is examined on the basis of an appropriate body of work and an oral examination (viva 
voce or viva). 
As a minimum, two appropriately qualified examiners are appointed for the purpose, at least one of 
whom is external to the higher education provider and the research degree-awarding body. Where more 
than two examiners are appointed, the majority are generally from outside the higher education provider 
and the research degree-awarding body 
None of the candidate's supervisors is appointed as an examiner. 
It is exceptional to appoint as internal or external examiner researchers who have had substantial 
co-authoring or collaborative involvement in the candidate's work or whose own work is the focus of the 
research project. 
Examiners submit separate, independent written reports before the viva and a joint report after it. 
25

The following are given careful consideration: 
the criteria to be used in appointing examiners 
the preparatory period prior to the viva 
how the viva will be conducted 
how and when the result will be communicated to the candidate 
how to handle cases where the examiners cannot reach a consensus 
the criteria to be used for selecting external examiners when they have had previous affiliations with the 
research degree-awarding body or the provider. 
More details on some of these are given below. 
The criteria used in appointing examiners determine how many examiners are to be appointed and 
other details. Higher education providers that are research degree-awarding bodies may appoint 
additional external examiners where the research student is also a member of staff, or in cases where the 
thesis is highly interdisciplinary. There is a methodology for establishing that the examiners have relevant 
qualifications and experience and a clear understanding of the task, and for determining in what 
circumstances and with what support an inexperienced examiner might be appointed. The higher 
education provider also decides what guidance is to be given to the examiners. 
The preparatory period prior to the viva includes providing the examiners with the information they 
need and ensuring that they are able to identify the areas to be explored at the viva. Thought is given to 
the procedures for handling such reports, including to whom they should be submitted and when. 
In planning how the viva will be conducted, higher education providers satisfy themselves that 
the process meets agreed criteria for fairness and consistency. Higher education providers that are 
research degree-awarding bodies may appoint an independent, non-examining chair, who may not 
contribute to the assessment judgement. Such an appointment, and clear guidance on the extent of the 
chair's role and responsibilities, including details about the circumstances in which the chair will be used, 
encourages consistency between different vivas and provides an additional viewpoint if the conduct of the 
viva should become the subject of a research student appeal. Where the appointment of an independent 
chair is not feasible, higher education providers that are research degree-awarding bodies find alternative 
ways of assuring fairness and consistency, acceptable to the candidate, that enable him or her to know 
the viva is being conducted in an appropriate manner. Higher education providers that are research 
degree-awarding bodies also take a view on whether the student's supervisor may be present with the 
research student's agreement, and if so, on what basis, making it clear that s/he may not contribute to the 
academic judgement; whether other people may be present (for example, current research students); 
and whether it would be helpful to ask for an account of how the viva was conducted. 
How and when the result will be communicated to the candidate is affected by the result itself, 
among other factors. It involves giving thought to: 
the range of assessment outcomes open to the examiners, including referral, or awarding a qualification 
different from the one for which the research student has been examined 
the nature and source of guidance to be given if a research student is asked to revise and re-submit the 
thesis 
the various parties who need to be notified of the result (for example the research student's sponsor). 
Research degree-awarding bodies also assure themselves that the research programme assessments 
carried out in its name address appropriate assessment criteria which are informed by this Indicator. 
For example, a higher education provider may decide to have a system for reading examiners' report(s) 
similar to that in place for reading external examiners' reports at undergraduate and taught master's 
levels, which would highlight any relevant comments or suggestions from examiners about the conduct of 
the final examination. Additionally, keeping a log to ensure that the process is being conducted promptly 
on the grounds that undue delay is unfair to the candidate may be considered. 
The main official source of information on research degree assessment is the academic framework and 
regulations of the research degree-awarding body. These are likely to be written in semi-legal language, 
because they may be used in formal complaints and appeals processes. The higher education provider 
may therefore choose to supplement regulations with a guide that provides candidates and staff with a 
26

clear understanding of the assessment process and its implications, explained from the research student's 
perspective. Information is given about timings and deadlines; the assessment process itself; the time 
taken to reach a decision; and the potential outcomes of the assessment. In particular, candidates are 
warned of the penalties for plagiarism, and reminded of the significance of declaring that the material 
being presented for examination is their own work. 
As the viva is an especially challenging event in research students' careers, higher education providers 
offer support in preparing for it. Support may include providing written guidance and/or making 
arrangements for the candidate to undergo a mock viva or other similar experience. 
Higher education providers also determine whether and when candidates should be given copies of the 
report and whether this should be the final report only, or the final report and the separate independent 
reports prepared before the viva. Examiners' reports can provide an important source of feedback if made 
accessible to candidates; where reports are made available, examiners are informed of this policy in 
advance. 
R e s e a r c h s t u d e n t c o m p l a i n t s a n d a p p e a l s 
Research student complaints and appeals 
It is in the interests of research students and higher education providers to resolve problems at an early 
stage. To facilitate this, higher education providers ensure that research students and staff understand 
the difference between informal ways of resolving problems and routes they can use to make formal 
complaints or appeals. It is also important to distinguish between complaints, which relate to general 
matters (including conduct), and appeals, which concern procedures leading to specific outcomes or 
decisions. Research degree-awarding bodies develop their own definitions of complaints and appeals, 
and assure themselves that staff and students are aware of the different procedures. 
Material relevant to this and the following two sections may also be found in Chapter B9: Academic 
Appeals and Student Complaints.21 
Indicator 18 
Higher education providers put in place and promote independent and formal 
procedures for dealing with complaints and appeals that are fair, clear to all concerned, 
robust, and applied consistently. The acceptable grounds for complaints and appeals are 
clearly defined. 
Procedures for addressing complaints and appeals at various organisational levels (degree-awarding 
body/faculty/school/department/research centre/research institute), are clearly and openly publicised to 
research students. They apply equally to all research students, including those who are part-time, off-site, 
registered on programmes delivered with others, or on visiting programmes. The importance of resolving 
any problems at an early stage is made clear to research students and staff. All concerned are made 
aware of the stages and processes, informal and formal, through which complaints and appeals can be 
made. 
Higher education providers ensure that their faculties, schools and departments have accessible 
mechanisms that apply when research students are not able to resolve difficulties informally. To assist in 
resolving problems at an early stage, providers appoint an impartial person/persons with suitable 
experience to whom research students can take their complaints, and whose role is widely publicised. 
Complaints 
Higher education providers implement complaints procedures that are appropriate for use by research 
students. These include an indicative timetable for dealing with different types of complaint; some may 
need to be dealt with more quickly than others. 
27

Higher education providers highlight to research students their responsibilities in relation to pursuing a 
complaint, and the need for them to discharge these. On receipt of a formal complaint, higher education 
providers inform research students promptly of the actions that they will take in order to investigate and 
resolve the issue. 
Appeals 
All appeals procedures are fit for purpose, impartial and well publicised to protect the rights of all those 
concerned. They are dealt with fairly and in a timely manner. 
Research degree-awarding bodies define the acceptable grounds for and how to lodge an appeal. 
This information is communicated to all research students. An accessible explanation of the appeals 
process is provided, including: 
how decisions are taken to grant an appeal hearing 
the constitution of an appeal panel, and the relation of its members to those involved in the original 
assessment decision 
information for research students about presenting their case 
how records of an appeal hearing are maintained 
the mechanisms for communicating the results of an appeal hearing to interested parties. 
Further guidelines, references and resources 
England and Wales 
Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA): 
www.oiahe.org.uk 
Scotland 
Scottish Public Sector Ombudsman (SPSO): 
www.spso.org.uk 
(Currently there is no comparable arrangement in Northern Ireland, although students at the 
Universities of Ulster and Queen's each have access to their University's Visitor). 
28

A p p e n d i x 1 - T h e E x p e c t a t i o n a n d I n d i c a t o r s : R e s e a r c h D e g r e e s 
Appendix 1 - The Expectation and Indicators 
Research Degrees 
Expectation 
This Chapter of the Quality Code sets out the following Expectation about research degrees which higher 
education providers are required to meet: 
Research degrees are awarded in a research environment that provides secure academic 
standards for doing research and learning about research approaches, methods, 
procedures and protocols. This environment offers students quality of opportunities and 
the support they need to achieve successful academic, personal and professional 
outcomes from their research degrees. 
The Indicators of sound practice 
Indicator 1 
Higher education providers that are research degree awarding bodies have regulations for research 
degrees that are clear and readily available to research students and staff, including examiners. Where 
appropriate, regulations are supplemented by similarly accessible, subject-specific guidance at the level of 
the faculty, school, department, research centre, or research institute. 
Indicator 2 
Higher education providers develop, implement and keep under review codes of practice for research 
degrees, which are widely applicable and help enable the higher education provider meet the Expectation 
of this Chapter. The codes are readily available to all students and staff involved in research degrees, and 
written in clear language understood by all users. 
Indicator 3 
Higher education providers monitor their research degree provision against internal and external 
indicators and targets that reflect the context in which research degrees are being offered. 
Indicator 4 
Higher education providers accept research students only into an environment that provides support for 
doing and learning about research, and where excellent research, recognised by the relevant subject 
community, is occurring. 
Indicator 5 
Higher education providers' admissions procedures for research degrees are clear, consistently applied 
and demonstrate equality of opportunity. 
Indicator 6 
Only appropriately qualified and prepared applicants are admitted to research degree programmes. 
Admissions decisions involve at least two members of the higher education provider's staff who have 
received training and guidance for the selection and admission of research degree students. The 
decision-making process enables the higher education provider to assure itself that balanced and 
independent admissions decisions have been made in accordance with its admissions policy. 
29

Indicator 7 
Higher education providers define and communicate clearly the responsibilities and entitlements of 
students undertaking research degree programmes. 
Indicator 8 
Research students are provided with sufficient information to enable them to begin their studies with an 
understanding of the environment in which they will be working. 
Indicator 9 
Higher education providers appoint supervisors with the appropriate skills and subject knowledge to 
support and encourage research students, and to monitor their progress effectively. 
Indicator 10 
Each research student has a supervisory team containing a main supervisor who is the clearly identified 
point of contact. 
Indicator 11 
Higher education providers ensure that the responsibilities of research student supervisors are readily 
available and clearly communicated to supervisors and students. 
Indicator 12 
Higher education providers ensure that individual supervisors have sufficient time to carry out their 
responsibilities effectively. 
Indicator 13 
Higher education providers put in place clearly defined mechanisms for monitoring and supporting 
research student progress, including formal and explicit reviews of progress at different stages. Research 
students, supervisors and other relevant staff are made aware of progress monitoring mechanisms, 
including the importance of keeping appropriate records of the outcomes of meetings and related 
activities. 
Indicator 14 
Research students have appropriate opportunities for developing research, personal and professional 
skills. Each research student's development needs are identified and agreed jointly by the student and 
appropriate staff at the start of the degree; these are regularly reviewed and updated as appropriate. 
Indicator 15 
Higher education providers put in place mechanisms to collect, review and respond as appropriate to 
evaluations from those concerned with research degrees, including individual research students and 
groups of research students or their representatives. Evaluations are considered openly and 
constructively and the results are communicated appropriately. 
Indicator 16 
Higher education providers that are research degree awarding bodies use criteria for assessing research 
degrees that enable them to define their academic standards and the achievements of their graduates. 
The criteria used to assess research degrees are clear and readily available to research students, staff 
and examiners. 
Indicator 17 
Research degree final assessment procedures are clear and are operated rigorously, fairly, and 
consistently. They include input from an external examiner and are carried out to a reasonable timescale. 
Assessment procedures are communicated clearly to research students, supervisors and examiners. 
30

Indicator 18 
Higher education providers put in place and promote independent and formal procedures for dealing with 
complaints and appeals that are fair, clear to all concerned, robust, and applied consistently. The 
acceptable grounds for complaints and appeals are clearly defined. 
31

A p p e n d i x 2 - M e m b e r s o f t h e A d v i s o r y G r o u p f o r C h a p t e r B 1 1 : R e s e a r c h D e g r e e s 
Appendix 2 - Members of the Advisory Group for 
Chapter B11: Research Degrees 
Janet Bohrer Assistant Director QAA 
Dr Iain 
Cameron Head of Research Careers and Diversity Research Councils UK 
Gill Clarke Specialist writer 
Dr Rob Daley Researcher Development Coordinator Heriot-Watt University 
Professor 
Pam Denicolo Vice Chair UK Council for Graduate 
Education (UKCGE) 
Dr Dawn 
Edwards Director of Quality Assurance and Enhancement Royal Northern College of Music 
Dr Kevin Flint Chair of Special Interest Group (SIG)/Senior Lecturer in 
Education 
Professional Doctorates 
SIG/Nottingham Trent University 
Heather 
Gibson Development Officer QAA Scotland 
Louisa Green Research Degrees Manager London School of Economics 
Dr Susan 
Grey Director of Research Degrees University of Hertfordshire 
Dr Peter 
Heard Executive Director, Graduate School Glyndwr University 
Dr Cathy 
Kerfoot Development Officer QAA 
Professor 
Ingrid Lunt 
Professor of Educational Studies and Director of 
Graduate Studies, Department of Education University of Oxford 
Dr Debbie 
McVitty Senior Research and Policy Officer (Higher Education) NUS 
32

Dante 
Micheaux 
NUS postgraduate representative and Postgraduate 
Association President University College London 
Steven 
Quigley Academic Registrar Regents College 
Dr Christian 
Yeomans Policy Officer (Europe) International Unit 
33

A p p e n d i x 3 - R e s e a r c h e r D e v e l o p m e n t F r a m e w o r k 
Appendix 3 - Researcher Development 
Framework 
Researcher Development Framework: 
www.qaa.ac.uk/en/AssuringStandardsAndQuality/Documents/Quality-Code-B11-Appendix-3.pdf 
34

R e f e r e n c e s 
References 
1 www.qaa.ac.uk/qualitycode 
2 www.qaa.ac.uk/reviews-and-reports/how-we-review-higher-education 
3 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=181 
4 www.qaa.ac.uk/about-us/glossary 
5 www.qaa.ac.uk/assuring-standards-and-quality/the-quality-code/qualifications 
6 www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/Doctoral_Characteristics.pdf 
7 www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/Masters-Degree-Characteristics-2010.pdf 
8 www.qaa.ac.uk/assuring-standards-and-quality/the-quality-code/qualifications 
9 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=2899 
10 www.ref.ac.uk 
11 Second chapter of the OECD 1993 Frascati Manual (reference: ISBN 9264142029) 
12 Scholarship for the REF is defined as the creation, development and maintenance of the intellectual 
infrastructure of subjects and disciplines, in forms such as dictionaries, scholarly editions, catalogues and 
contributions to major research databases. 
13 www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-developmentframework/
the-vitae-researcher-development-statement 
14 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=2899 
15 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=173 
16 www.qaa.ac.uk/assuring-standards-and-quality/the-quality-code/quality-code-part-c 
17 www.qaa.ac.uk/assuring-standards-and-quality/the-quality-code/quality-code-part-c 
18 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=2898 
19 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=2900 
20 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=176 
21 www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication?PubID=178 
35

© The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education 2018 
Southgate House, Southgate Street, Gloucester, GL1 1UB 
Tel: 01452 557000 
Email: enquiries@qaa.ac.uk 
Website: www.qaa.ac.uk 
Registered charity numbers 1062746 and SC037786 
This document was downloaded from the QAA website on 03 May 2018 
36

