Almost 100,000 students studied for a doctoral research degree in the UK during 2014-15  
(data source: HESA
). This represents a signi˜cant body of students who, arguably, have not had  
the same level of attention as their undergraduate counterparts in recent and proposed higher 

education reforms. What sort of experience should these students expect and what do they actually 

get at the moment?
Characteristics of doctoral research degrees
Doctoral research programmes can be practice or discipline-based. The former are often the choice 

of mid-career professionals, in subjects such as business or engineering. The latter are by far the most 

common doctoral awards, involving a research project under the supervision of an academic peer, 

leading to a PhD. Candidates are typically assessed on their thesis, portfolio, artefact or composition, 

and by oral examination (viva).
The particular 
characteristics of doctoral degrees
 are set out in Part A of the UK Quality Code for 
Higher Education (the Quality Code). A core characteristic is that doctoral candidates should generate 

new knowledge or original research, or apply existing research in a new way. Doctoral graduates 

should have the ability to: 
 discover, analyse, evaluate, manage, conserve and communicate an ever-increasing volume of
knowledge from a range of sources
 think critically about problems in order to produce innovative solutions and create new knowledge.
That process of discovery and generating new knowledge demands a thriving and active research 

environment. The Quality Code emphasises the fundamental importance of a high quality research 

environment, both in the 
Doctoral Degree Characteristics Statement
 and in Chapter B11: Research 

Degrees
, which suggests that:
‚Higher education providers accept research students only into an environment that provides support 
for doing and learning about research, and where excellent research, recognised by the relevant 

subject community, is occurring.™
UK higher education has a world-class research base, the quality of which is assessed through the 
Research Excellence Framework
 (REF). The most recent REF results were published in 2014; of the 

154 UK universities assessed, 30 per cent of their submissions were judged to be world-leading and a 

further 46 per cent to be internationally excellent. 
Excellent research may not, however, automatically translate into a great experience for doctoral 
research students. The 
2015 Postgraduate Research Experience Survey
 by the Higher Education 
Academy found that, while the vast majority of students (82 per cent) were satis˜ed with their 

experience of the research programme, when this was broken down into di˚erent areas, research 

culture was rated the lowest, with 60 per cent of respondents agreeing that they had opportunities to 

become involved in the wider research community beyond their department.
QAA
Viewpoint
Doctoral research students: what should they expect 
from their academic experience?
January 2017
Findings from QAA™s reviews
QAA reviews have found that higher education institutions provide a good student experience overall. 
QAA™s analysis of its Higher Education Reviews of universities and colleges in England, Northern 

Ireland and Wales during 2013-16 shows that higher education institutions performed very well: 
 
97 per cent received satisfactory review outcomes in all areas and around 30 per cent received one 
 
or more commendations. 
For postgraduate students speci˜cally, however, the three years of Higher Education Review 
 (2013-14
, 2014-15
 and 2015-16) identi˜ed a number of areas for development to improve the student 
experience in some institutions. These include:
 the supervision, development and induction of postgraduate research students 
 the breadth of subject and supervisory expertise available to research students
 the delivery of research degrees through partnership arrangements
 the collection of and response to feedback from research students.
A number of features of good practice were also identi˜ed in relation to research degrees during that 

period, including:  high quality research environments at several institutions
 opportunities to study internationally to add richness to the research student experience
  integrated approaches to student support to enable a wide range of student needs to be met, 
including those of research students 
 monitoring research students™ employability rates.
QAA™s view: what doctoral students should expect
QAA sets out the higher education sector™s expectations for doctoral research students in the 
 Doctoral Degree Characteristics Statement
 and the Quality Code, 
Chapter B11
. QAA review outcomes 

and research by other bodies have found that, while the overall student experience is very good for 

both undergraduate and postgraduate students, there is room to improve this further for doctoral 

research programmes. QAA will be conducting further work over the coming months, through its 
 Quality Enhancement Network
 and Postgraduate Advisory Group, to explore and better understand the 

doctoral student experience, and will share relevant ˜ndings with government and sector partners.
The Higher Education and Research Bill
 currently making its way through parliament proposes 
 to change the higher education research landscape by combining the research function of the 
 
Higher Education Funding Council for England with the seven current research councils, to create 
 
a new body, UK Research and Innovation (UKRI). A recent 
Department for Education publication
  
(PDF, 309KB) helpfully provides clarity on joint-working between UKRI and the new O˛ce 
 
for Students.
In the context of this shifting research infrastructure, and policy more focused on undergraduates, it 
is important that doctoral research students are also supported and valued. The new knowledge and 

skills they generate can continue to invigorate the UK economy and enhance the UK higher education 

sector™s reputation around the world.
© The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education 2017
 
Registered charity numbers 1062746 and SC037786
 
www.qaa.ac.uk
QAA
Viewpoint
